I fell in love at first sight.
It was ten years ago. I was walking at the university, my notebooks under my arm, like a passionate young student.
He bumped into me absentmindedly
But love is magic!
For this magic to work, certain conditions must be met.
But too often, we block this emotional circulation without knowing it.
Yet, we are all capable, if we will, to find love in three months.
So I would like to tell you two things: first, it is the opposite of what you can read in women's magazines; secondly, it relies on the opposite dynamics of that which consists in lying on a couch.
Why is it contrary to what is said in women's magazines?
Because in women's magazines, you are often told you should talk about your strong points;
that what kills love is control -
control over your image, control over what you want to reveal about yourself.
So you are told that you must talk about your strong points, that you must be self-confident, and all that seems natural to you.
I often meet women who are beautiful, have a great job, are smart, are self-confident. And yet, they can't find love.
If we had to wait for self-confidence to find love, there would not be many babies on Earth.
So I will take the example of two singles: imagine Paul and Virginia.
They meet for the first time around a drink.
Paul is a serious man, he will want to appear intelligent, but also friendly. Virginie is a little more bohemian, so she will want to show how eclectic her life is, how unusual her activities are, and then she will also want to talk about her travels.
So that exchange is bound for disaster.
It so happens that when you want to show yourself in your best light, when you wish to arouse admiration, without knowing it, you block the circulation of emotions.
And that's a disaster.
Imagine a cursor on the range of your personality: at one end, you gather all your sources of joy: what makes you tick, what makes you wake up in the morning, what makes you very joyful, And at the other end, you put what, in your journey, constitutes your trials, but also your doubts, your questions.
The more you advance in age, the more you tend to place that cursor in the center -
what you do, your movies, your readings, your outings, your travels.
The more you advance in age, the more you need to be reassured.
In fact, you must do the opposite.
Sometimes, you get to meet someone only once, then you might as well be yourself, only stronger.
Because this is the only way to truly display our personality, to let go of your control, and then to establish a bridge of exchange so as to let emotions circulate.
Love encompasses much more.
It's not devoted to one person or one soulmate exclusively.
Secondly: why is falling in love or finding love the absolutely opposite dynamics of lying on a couch?
Because when you are at the shrink, you're into introspection, into analysis. When you want to fall in love, you are into receiving, into opening up.
When you are at a psychiatrist's, you try to understand; to understand yourself, understand your expectations; when you fall in love, you are totally into receiving, you must allow yourself to be surprised by a personality, you must be carried away, and you must not listen to this little voice that judges, that will tell you that this person does not meet your requirements.
For Paul and Virginia to have a fiery history, they must return to the state of an adolescent;
this teenager, with his emotions, his moods, and the somewhat cyclotomic activity of his moods.
Imagine him coming out of a period of withdrawal; by opening up to the world, he's all about receiving from others, and his attention isn't caught by the first or second person passing by but the third one; he's all about connection with this passing person so he doesn't control himself at all, and he can totally receive.
You will tell me, "OK, it's all very well, but exactly, around a drink, how do you do it?"
In order to create love reciprocity, you must wake up a sleeping being.
Waking up in yourself, but also for the other, a sleeping being, it means resonating strings that do not vibrate often.
It's about asking questions about what drives our life, what drives us, what makes us joyful, about perhaps a difficult journey, about the look back on such or such experience.
I can already hear some say,
"Oh, no! But on the first date, you don't go about asking intimate questions."
But these are not intimate questions!
Instead of asking, "What's your job, how's it going?"
maybe, "Why did you choose this job?"
Instead of asking, "Ah, you play golf.. And where do you play?
How often do you play?",
you ask, "Why do you play golf?
And tennis?
Why did you choose this career change?"
It is the only way to express what lies deep within you.
And then finally, you realize that it is not every day you get the opportunity to look within yourself for answers to these questions about your choices.
This is the only way to free and set up this exchange bridge that allows emotions to circulate.
You fall in love with someone not for what they do, or how they do it, but for why they do it.
Do you know these Russian dolls? Imagine that in you, you have several Russian dolls: the biggest is the one that controls.
Well, if you really want to fall in love and be in an exchange where emotions circulate, you must look not for the doll that controls, judges, thinks, is intelligent, but this smallest, very whole doll at the bottom, which is the one that, like the tree, wants to grow, receive light, transform, be touched.
Actually, we can feel positive emotions and thus feel love for every one around us, even strangers.
You can, for example, experience micro-moments of love with your butcher without being unfaithful.
 Now the micro-moments of love experienced with strangers and those experienced with a loved one are almost identical.
Because you all know that being in love, falling in love is to be revealed to oneself.
I can already hear some people say, "No, I do not work like that.
I let myself be guided by physical attractions or I let myself be guided by intellectual attraction."
Fine.
But you can fail.
You can fail if you do not enrich your attractions with all that very raw material which constitutes us.
Many people come to see me, who are sometimes divorced, single, and who tell me, "I have not fallen in love for years," or "I ask for too much, I cannot find the right person," or "I do not meet enough people," or "I am not interested in anyone at the moment!"
Well, in fact, you are misinterpreting.
In fact, these people, when they meet someone, only get 10% of their personality.
Because if they really establish a bridge of exchange where emotions circulate, then they receive 100% of the person.
For couples, you'll tell me, "OK, that's fine, but falling in love with your significant other
does it work the same way?"
And here I say a big yes.
For a couple, it's about reconnecting regularly with what moves us in the other.
When we separate, when we cheat, when we distance ourselves, it is because we lost the connection between us.
We all evolve!
Fifteen or twenty years later, we are not the same anymore.
It's not that bad.
But just because of exchanges, we connect regularly through what makes us vibrate, through what makes us sensitive, then we touch the other's vulnerability.
You know, vulnerability has nothing to do with weakness.
Vulnerability is what is fragile, it's our doubts, our questions.
Because you know, someone's strength, you see it, you see it all the time.
On the other hand, vulnerability is rarely shown.
We often separate for the same reasons we have loved each other.
You remember Paul - fifteen years and three children later, he's going to get irritated, upset about Virginie's very bohemian side.
Researchers observe the same biological synchrony.
Yet there are some differences, especially in the triggering factors of these micro-moments - since intimacy, words, and gestures are not the same -
And Virginie will be irritated by Paul's rigidity and his very orderly mind over things and the world.
And yet, they were precisely attracted fifteen years earlier by this difference, by this very different matter that had in fact, perhaps, awakened something in them that their education had stifled.
If the couple connects regularly, if the couple sets up these exchanges, then it is still easier to accept the idea of the other's difference.
If we want to get out of the differences-irritate-me stage, that's when we really understand what love with a capital L is for, what a couple that lasts is for.
Because it is much easier to accept the alterity of the other when we connect regularly, when we engage regularly.
The important thing I wanted to tell you about the couple is that is when you connect, it is much easier to understand that the other, Is actually an invitation to go and wake up in us this part that maybe our education has buried, has stifled.
The other is an invitation to go reveal colors, other colors of our personality.
Love!
We cosmologists, are researchers telling the story of the universe.
How, in 13.7 billion years, it went from a stage where matter is distributed from a simple and uniform shape to today's complex architecture.
To do this, we make dynamic mapping, by identifying galaxies in the sky then measuring their distances and movements.
It was while mapping the movements in the universe that we understood that we live on a planet, Earth, orbitting around a star, the Sun, which is part of a set of 200 billion other stars: our galaxy, the Milky Way.
And as I've just found out with my team, our galaxy is part of a very large set, called a super-cluster which contains one million galaxies.
I now invite you on a journey into the universe to discover our super cluster, Laniakea.
Everything began in the early 1960's when two Americans fortuitously discovered a radiation bathing the whole Universe.
It allowed us allows us to measure that our galaxy moves at the staggering speed of 630 kilometers per second.
At that time, that great speed could not be explained.
It would unleash a craze among astrophysicists, and several teams were set up to launch into this quest for understanding.
In particular, a team of American cosmologists who called themselves The Seven Samurai, managed, after 22 years of work, to generate a first consistent dynamic map: they managed to measure the travel speed of 400 galaxies.
It allowed them to delineate the region that attracts us into the Universe.
Unfortunately, these measures are very difficult to make, and in particular, the area which seems to attract us is hidden by our own galaxy.
The stars in our galaxy form a light strip in the sky masking this region of the Universe.
The Seven Samurai, failing to understand that speed, proposed a model: it would be a huge mass, spherical and obscure, hidden from view, attracting us.
They called it "The Great Attractor."
I was 22 at the time, I was fascinated by this mysterious Great Attractor.
I decided to make it the subject of my thesis for my PhD.
but also in their frequency since, logically, we share more micro-moments of love with our loved ones.
Love isn't long-lasting.
When I was 15 years old, my idea of love had evolved a little bit.
So, I'm leaving for Australia because it is not observable from the northern hemisphere.
And there, for three years, I scanned the skies from an observatory totally isolated in the bush, and I tried to connect the filaments, and galaxy alignments on my maps, failing to better understand the Great Attractor.
Finally in 1999, an international conference gathering all the teams working on the subject, confirmed everyone's results, and announced the status quo.
We wouldn't make it.
The signals were too weak, too difficult to measure, we were stumbling on a technological dead end: the telescopes were not powerful enough.
It would take us 10 years to build new telescopes, and improve, refurbish existing ones.
We would build giant radio telescopes like this one, which is my favorite.
It is 110 meters in diameter, it is located in Green Bank in West Virginia, in the United States, and with radio telescopes, - you can see the size of the men at the bottom of the photo - with this type of radio telescope, we can observe galaxies by day.
When we are in the field of light rays, which is called radio, we are not dazzled by our star, the Sun, which is a star that rather emits visible colors.
So I can, with this radio telescope, watch galaxies day and night.
To measure the speeds of galaxies, there is an additional difficulty, which is that we need two observations for each galaxy, and the more distant a galaxy, - we want to expand the map - the weaker the signal it sends us.
Here you see the three galaxies.
Yes, yes! From top to bottom,
these are three galaxies which are increasingly distant, and you see that the signal is increasingly noisy.
The second observation is in optics.
I also need a picture of this galaxy.
For this, it takes usual telescopes, the optical telescopes, we most use.
But similarly, - this is the same galaxy, represented differently - the farther this galaxy is from the observer, the smaller and difficult to measure it becomes.
In 2006, I went to work for a year in one of the largest observatories in the world which is located at an altitude of 5,000 meters at the top of an extinct volcano, on the island of Hawaii.
I conducted test observations, with a new generation of instruments and I was dazzled by the great quality of data I get.
Back in Lyon, I decided to revive this research program with renewed enthusiasm.
To enlarge the map of the Universe in all directions, I had to observe with instruments, and telescopes, distributed in both hemispheres, and also with researchers spread across all time zones, to go faster.
So I recruited a small team of about ten men and women, Americans, Europeans, Russians, Australians.
And there, for three years, we observed, day after day, night after night, often in the most total isolation, sometimes at a very high altitude, our families could see that we no longer knew what day it is, or on what time zone we were working.
We were often extremely tired physically.
But after three years of observations, we had measured the speeds of 8000 galaxies.
Back then, I believed in eternal and unchanging love.
One evening, as I was experiencing my first heartbreak, my father came to comfort me, and he said, "Sweety, you know, you're not going to love this boy your whole life."
These 8,000 galaxies are distributed on a map which has doubled in size compared to that of the late 1990s, from the Seven Samurai.
On these maps, 100,000 galaxies are distributed in this volume of Universe and we measured the travel speed of 8,000 of them.
Now we had to process the data, and calculate the consistency of movements.
I convinced a theorist and an expert in 3D data visualization to join us
We must take into account in our calculations there would be five times more invisible matter in the Universe than visible matter.
We used the galaxies as light sensors that would be spread on the surface of an ocean of invisible and moving matter.
We still had to draw another concept, because our maps still did not make sense.
We used the watershed concept which is just another discipline, hydrography.
And there, suddenly, the maps made sense.
We saw, in the trajectories of galaxies two different watersheds appear, we have here colorized red and black, and particularly our galaxy belongs to this black colorized watershed.
Our eyes adjusted again, we no longer saw things in the same way, and we decided to move the center of the map beyond our observer's position and toward the center of this watershed seeming to be the Great Attractor.
Suddenly, a watershed line was obvious.
We would connect three dimensions to this surface which includes a volume in which each galaxy has an inwardly-converging movement.
So this watershed line between the galaxies belonging our physical structure, has galaxies that move towards another structure.
For the first time, we had given a physical definition to what is the largest galaxy structure in the Universe, a super cluster.
That super cluster we live in is immense.
Take our galaxy, multiply it by 100,000, add a million smaller galaxies and you get Laniakea.
I organized an International conference in France, I invited all the researchers who had resumed work on the subject, to announce our results, so that they could work with our data, and our colleagues nodded and they formally approved the name we have chosen to give it.
Laniakea, in Hawaiian, means "Huge heavenly horizon."
Horizon, because by finding a boundary, we discovered it; heavenly, because it sits in space; and huge as it is a hundred times bigger then what was believed to be a super cluster before.
To our cosmic address, we can add one line: planet Earth, Sun star, Milky Way galaxy, super-cluster Laniakea, in the Universe.
 Laniakea is very big, it is 500 million light years in diameter.
So light year: for us, astrophysicists, space is time data.
The Sun is located 150 million km away from us.
It takes 8 minutes to the Sun light to reach us it is eight light minutes away.
Well, just imagine how upset and misunderstood I felt!
Let's remember that I was only fifteen.
In fact, I must admit many years later that, yes, my father was right.
The light crossing our galaxy from end to end would take100,000 years.
Our galaxy is 100,000 light-years wide.
Laniakea, is 500 million light years wide.
And it is reaching this distance, by transcending and including it, that we understood that the Great Attractor is not a spherical object, dark, immense, and hidden from view, but the central valley a celestial continent towards which 5 rivers of matter flow gravitationally
But all this is only 1%, just 1% of the map the Universe we still have to make.
And even if we localized and quantified it, we still don't know what dark matter is, at the microscopic level.
Essentially, being a physicist, is to stay the course, to continue the quest of knowledge of Humanity, it is to stand on this divide, this border between what is known and what is unknown.
I invite you to stand there with us, to look up at the sky, in your busy daily lives, and feel, and share this vertigo that the beauty and complexity of our Universe gives us.
Thank you.
I'm a primatologist and I work for the conservation of nature.
Here I was 25, when I started my career in the Democratic Republic of Congo.
I led a 3-year mission to study and research a community of chimpanzees in Virunga National Park.
It was 1987.
Chimpanzees were the goal of my studies , but at the same time they were my main social contact, and so over time, they gradually became very important to me.
I would spend all day in the forest with them and I began - I was never threatened even if they have a reputation of being dangerous - and gradually I began to know each individual, each individual's personality and I would recognize them by their gestures, their friendships, and their position in the group.
As a scientist, I learned - and you learn - to be impartial, objective and to avoid at all costs to become too emotionally attached with the subject of your research.
But the reality is that I am, and we all are, social primates. So we have
a natural understanding and empathy for them.
This means that we all have a tendency to interpret what we observe.
But sometimes, to avoid to anthropomorphize and lose objectivity, we avoid acknowledging the obvious.
However, there has been an exception, with a chimpanzee I had named Ozzie.
I was walking in the forest every day, I knew all of them but Ozzie was a male teenager who had been injured, before my arrival in the forest, by a poacher trap.
And as you can see, his hand - despite the poor quality of the photo - his hand was not working.
His left hand.
It was swollen, without hair or dexterity.
He could use it as a hook, to draw branches to him and he could also move normally in the forest.
Really, love isn't a steady emotion that we feel for months or years.
In fact, it's a short-lived emotion that lasts a few seconds.
But he was a little excluded by the other chimpanzees.
He was rarely deloused which for a chimpanzee is a sign of low social status.
One afternoon, one sunny afternoon, all the chimpanzees were resting, having a nap.
I was sitting on the ground, with my back against a tree and they were all scattered around me and I was watching them.
But Ozzie was close in a... in a tree, on a branch, maybe one meter above the ground.
And he was resting with eyes closed.
But at some point, I realized he was looking at me.
And he swung his good arm and it was very relaxed, almost too cool almost like the boy stretching at the cinema to put his arm around to the girl next to him.
And at some point, I realized he was reaching for my hand, as if inviting me to touch him.
He was not afraid of me, he was curious and reaching out.
If I had moved my body slightly and stretched my arm, I could have touched his fingers.
My first reflex was to see this gesture as a friendly one.
My first reflex was to respond to his gesture.
I was touched, I was tempted, I was curious but I was not sure: should I cross the bridge with that other species?
Should I go to meet this being that remained somehow unfathomable to me even after years of research and observation.
He was also both familiar, but he also a stranger I could never truly know.
There I was, sitting with my back against the tree and I did not know what to do.
And it is this confusion that Ozzie provoked in me which raised the question I'm asking here.
What is the proper relationship between the human and the other?
What should be the ideal bridge between the human and the animal?
Without a common language it is impossible for us to exchange clearly and without confusion to other animals... As it is impossible for them to express themselves to us.
I do not mean that with a common language, there wouldn't be any possibility of confusion or misunderstanding... But without verbal language, it's so easy to question what is observed or misinterpreted.
So we use Science as the language that enables us to understand and explain what is observed... And the stricter the discipline, the lesser the risk of losing objectivity.
This is important, because we have a tendency to explain, interpret what we observe.
The fear of anthropomorphism and efforts to avoid any subjective interpretation are valid, but they also serve as a blindfold covering our eyes preventing us from seeing.
However, rest assured, it's renewable infinitely.
In other words, you won't love your child, your wife, your partner, your friends or your parents for your whole life.
You'll love them one, two, twenty times a day and sometimes, let's face it, not at all.
What is often extremely convenient!
Consider this: if we cannot prove that an animal suffers, we can ignore its suffering.
If we cannot demonstrate clearly how its sophisticated brain works, then we can deny it works in a sophisticated manner.
And we can simply conclude it is driven by its instincts without self-consciousness, unable to think about its life, fears, desires and hopes.
All this does not exist, because we can not see it.
A belief system is in place, based on philosophy and religion, allowing man to place himself at the top of a pyramid with superiority and domination over all other species.
And one proof, among others, of this is that research in animal intelligence seeks and notes mostly how humans are superior to other animals... We view our skills and our superior capabilities as due to our complex and sophisticated brain.
And it gives us a unique potential in intelligence, empathy and altruism.
But the reality is that these skills are neither unique to humans, nor always higher.
Let me give you an example.
The brain of the orca is large and comparable structurally to the human brain.
Apart from an area... The area that allows us to feel and control emotions, and develop social ties.
This area contains the limbic lobe, the insular cortex and the cap.
This area in the orca is proportionally larger and more complex than humans.
So the only logical conclusion of such observation is a logic that we often apply to explain our human superiority over other animals, is that such complexity would also indicate more capacity in this creature.
This part of the brain in the orca is more complex... so its emotional bonds, its emotional life are likely to be deeper, more complex and somehow unfathomable for us humans who do not have these capabilities.
But we continue to ignore the implications of these studies, and especially to look for research that does not call into question our "superiority".
Denying animals the ability of having a sophisticated reflection animals has been very convenient to us, and continues to do so.
This allowed us to exploit and even exterminate other species regardless of the impact on their lives,
and without much remorse.
We talk about Human and Animal... Not of the human as an animal.
The animal is often used as a derogatory word.
Historically and in contemporary life, the word 'animal' is used as an insult.
To behave like an animal is unworthy of us... Wild, uncontrolled, unrestrained.
Driven by its instincts
and devoid of morality.
 Love isn't unconditional.
At the beginning of our relationship, my partner once told me something rather strange that was going to change my idea of love.
He said, "Anyway, today, you don't love me."
Like a beast. A pig.
Or rat. Or a cockroach.
Put... think how many times
you have heard the sentence
"Phew! darling, you eat like a pig."?
But this is not a meaningless little phrase.
And it can go very far.
And in the racist and genocidal language, comparisons with animals are very common.
So, we used the same the theoretical human superiority to exploit and hurt other humans by comparing them to animals.
We justified, by their lack of morality or sophisticated mental capacities, the exploitation and enslavement of other humans by this comparison and this superiority theory.
This allowed us to discriminate based on race, religion, sexuality or gender.
It is very important to remember that human exploitation was done the same way as we exploited animals.
So... What is the proper relationship with the animal?
Now I do not want to replace one illusion with another... nor do I want you to accept the illusion and the utopian world where all the animals have the same capacities!
I would especially like us to be aware of our lack of humility and lack of integrity. And I'd like us to admit it as illusory.
Take for example an animal...
Picture yourself in front of a dog, for example.
We will all consider ourselves superior even if that same dog had a capacity of smell or in the detection of certain diseases far beyond ours.
So superior in what?
Perhaps in a few decades we will look at our attitudes and our behavior towards animals with the same uneasiness and shame, and we will find grotesque the way that today, we look at discrimination against other human populations, slavery and genocide.
So... what is the good relationship with animals?
I'm coming back to Ozzie who reached his arm in the forest.
Everything indicated a friendly gesture...
Maybe even acknowledging my own inferior status as an alien a little comparable to his.
Maybe we were both each other's "other" as well as being "other" to the chimpanzees in the group.
It was very difficult to make a choice...
So at first, I found that quite strange, and I answered just as strangely, "Of course, I love you today."
Then, this idea sinked in.
which upset me, so I looked back.
I looked at him.
What a temptation to cross the border and to meet the other species, a totally wild animal and reciprocate the complicity and friendship that he seemed to offer me.
But one thing I knew: touching a wild animal and especially a great ape that is so vulnerable to humans... this is rarely good for the animal.
So I did not respond to his gesture.
I looked at him, but I kept my hands folded on my lap.
And after a little while, Ozzie withdrew his hand and stopped looking at me.
I had made the choice not to cross the bridge...
Because somehow I felt it would have been for me...
and not for him. I wanted him to know he had nothing to fear from me...
But the unpleasant reality is that man is everything dangerous, threatening and essentially immoral in the world of animals.
For Ozzie, his future and wellbeing would depend on him keeping a little fear of man.
I did not know and I would never have known the consequences, but since then, the Congo war led to the massacres of humans and animals by the military, poachers and rebels. For Ozzie,
his future was with chimpanzees.
And it would have been dangerous for him to put too much trust in a human being.
But I'm left with the question... "What if.... ".
And I cannot say that I wasn't tempted... nor that I do not regret my decision a little.
After so many years with wild animals and so many years looking for the ideal scientific position, I'm beginning to understand the limits of my own knowledge and all that remains unfathomable and essentially different.
Now I come back to the question I put to you: what is the ideal bridge between the human and the animal?
And I wonder, should we focus that much on a comparison of the differences?
Or should we look at these differences and the value, the beauty and importance of these differences?
I think the terra incognita of other animals is defined by our ignorance and this blindfold we deliberately put before our eyes to avoid seeing.
Maybe the ideal bridge between the human and the other should be a celebration of those differences towards a respectful coexistence. Thank you.
Being human is complicated.
Because we have limits and barriers.
A limit marks something impossible.
A barrier is something we believe is impossible.
Are there moments, events, or conditions that foster love?
Indeed there are, two of them.
First, there must be a feeling of safety because our brain can't feel love in the face of danger or threat.
So in one instance, we can't do something.
In the other, we're afraid of doing it.
Let me give you an example.
Imagine you're at a party
and there's a pretty American girl or a handsome Australian surfer.
But you don't speak English; too bad!
You can't talk to him or her.
So that's a limit.
The truth is you're scared to do it because your English is bad.
That is a barrier.
Seeing the difference isn't always straight-forward,
but you need to know there is one.
The goal is to know your limits and overcome your barriers.
I always used to do the opposite.
I would talk in class when I was meant to be quiet.
And when I was a mechanic, I wanted to make music.
I thought music was for musicians and so I left it alone.
Then one day at the factory where I was working at when I was 18, I had an accident and lost my hand.
That gave me a real limit: I could no longer shake people's hands.
For people like me, there are prosthetic limbs.
Articulated hands which allow us to regain some autonomy.
Some models are even available on state health insurance.
But they can only make one movement: the pincer.
You can imagine the look on my face when I realized I was getting a crab claw for a new hand.
There are other hands which -- It was hard to get a grip on either situation. 
Other hands let you move all the fingers, and are connected to a computer via Bluetooth... It's great!
Second, the relationship must be authentic,
which means that, from a scientific point of view, we need to be present physically and emotionally.
But then you hit a real barrier because they cost 40,000 euros.
And well, I haven't got 40,000 euros.
Anyway, a prosthetic limb shouldn't cost an arm and a leg.
 It shouldn't.
Then, one day, I discovered fab labs, where you can design and make things, places where you truly learn through mistakes.
When I first saw the 3D printer, I naturally asked if I could use it to make a hand.
When they understood why, they decided to help me.
We formed a team of volunteers, engineers, teachers, technicians, high school students, interns, job-seekers and disabled people.
We took some open source plans from the Internet.
That means free materials available to everyone.
We took a hand blueprint from iMove, an open source robot,
and we printed a hand. VoilĂ !
We put fishing wire through it,
which we joined up to small electric motors,
connected to an electronic board with muscle sensors and batteries.
We made it, we tested it, and it worked.
We made a bionic hand in a garage, which cost 300 euros and
allows me to shake people's hands.
Now it's in Paris, at the MusĂŠe de l'Homme.
And that's just the start!
Plenty of people around the world work with open source materials to make prosthetic limbs affordable and adaptable to everyone.
You can see here I have a model based on plans from Open Bionics.
When I had my accident, I became officially disabled.
But today, I feel like I'm an expert on bionic hands.
Yesterday, I was a job-seeker and today I still am. 
Now if love is neither long-lasting, nor exclusive nor unconditional, then, what is it exactly?
Love is the strongest among the positive emotions. It's the most important emotional experience with regards to our health and our self-development.
It is a king of fuel that powers both our body and our mind that is as important as food or oxygen.
But...
I chair the association we set up, which is called My Human Kit.
We do fundraising, and we aren't going to stop there.
My Human Kit wants to adapt fab labs so that people can learn how to do their own repairs.
You can use it to print prostheses, make wheelchairs using PVC pipes, operate computers using brain helmets, combine high-tech and low-tech to start a social revolution aimed at improving health for everyone.
Mainly a learning revolution, to change how people see things. Above all, to change the way we see ourselves
by turning problems into solutions.
We call that "handicapowerment."
Now that's something new.
 Today, technology and mutual assistance are enabling us to surpass our limits.
Now, all we humans have to do is break down these barriers by turning our limits into a force for motivation.
I used to be unable to shake people's hands, give applause or embrace people, and today I have lots of prosthetic hands for doing lots of things.
What I really wanted to do was music, but I decided to learn the drums on the day I realized it was too late to.
Not very smart of me.
Three years ago, that was my limit because it was impossible.
I should have given up.
Today, it has become a barrier because I'm afraid to play in front of you.
 Please, this is very important. If you see Daft Punk, tell them I don't have a helmet, but I do have a bionic arm and I'd like to play with them.
Now I ask you to clap me in
so I can have a rhythm.
Not too fast!
 There are things we think are impossible, and sometimes that's just the beginning.
So how about you? Which barriers do you want to break?
Thank you!
How many of you would agree with me that we live in a world full of noise and pollution,
too much information, violence, social networks, television?
Researchers invite us to reconsider love as a moment, since it lasts a few seconds,
and it is the accumulation of these micro-moments that strengthen the relationship.
So, if you agree with me, raise your hand please.
Yes, indeed, we live in an increasingly polluted world,
and the impact on society is that we lose the meaning of life,
we lose the meaning of our own lives.
And we lose ground.
And you can imagine the impact it will have on younger generations who collapse into violence, and in the end, no longer know where to go.
And this has a significant impact on society.
I am going to tell you two stories which help me discover a method which I actually called "The Voice."
Some will call it the sixth sense, others call it the little voice or the voice of God.
And through these two stories, you will see how it can be used to find the meaning of our own lives.
So, I have been living in Los Angeles, for about 10 years.
And five years ago, I was in a romantic relationship in which I lost ground.
I no longer knew if I wanted to pursue that relationship
and it tormented me, tormented, tormented for years.
It lasted about three years,
and in fact, at the end of the fifth year, I told myself, "It would be great to get away for a spiritual retreat to search for intimacy with God to hear what he has to say."
So, I decided to leave for a three-day retreat.
So, I live in the south of Los Angeles called The Valley. It's a very dry area, and I chose a big church in Santa Monica, near the coast, near the beach.
I went there for 3 days.
I remember that on Friday, I am about to leave, so I packed my bags, and at that time, my ex-girlfriend left with me to the gas station to get some gas.
And she looked at me and said, "Jean Marc, I don't feel it.
I know you have a decision to take, but know that I don't feel it.
Please don't leave."
Nevertheless, being proud and arrogant, I decided to leave anyway.
So, I took the freeway that goes to Santa Monica. The retreat began at around 5 pm.
In reality, love is when you give a warm hug to a child, even if she isn't yours. It's when you laugh with a friend, sometimes for no reason. It's when you walk hand in hand with your partner. It's when you have a passionate conversation with your colleague.
Basically, there is love as soon as two people connect with each other and share a positive emotion.
Three phenomenons are prerequisite to feel those micro-moments of love.
There were roughly 40 participants.
And the first afternoon went very well, we introduced each other.
And, I slept at the hotel that day to make room for silence, which is essential to find meaning in our lives.
On Saturday morning, everything went well too.
And at around 3 pm, we are told, "Listen, you've been working for a while, you have reflected for a while, it'd be nice to take a break."
So, in Santa Monica, the church is located in a very residential area with small streets and a lot of houses.
Imagine 40 people coming out of the presbytery.
So, as we are heading towards the exit
when my turn came, as I got ready to put the first foot outside the church,
I felt a small voice that caught my attention - you can't hear it, but you feel it inside - which told me, "Jean-Marc, remain there.
Remain in the presbytery."
Remember, I am proud. So I replied, "Why me?
Why should I stay here?
Everybody is going out, we can take a break, get some fresh air, why me?"
And I am actually debating and negotiating with that voice.
And I said to myself, "I'll go."
So, it's a bit contradictory; I came to look for answers, but when the voice speaks to me, I don't listen to it.
So, I started walking. The church is at my back, and far away I can see the ocean.
I told myself, "This is the ideal place to take a break for 15 minutes."
So I continued to walk. There are small birds, it's very quiet around me.
And I see my colleagues at a distance.
And I realized I have been walking for about 10 minutes.
I said to myself, "OK, we had 15 minutes, it's time to go back."
I'm about to turn around. It is a residential area with only two streets.
I eventually came to a crosswalk.
I turned and stared walking. When I reached the middle, I suddenly heard the squeal of tires,
First, we need to share a positive emotion.
Then we need to be in tune, meaning, in resonance, you know, when we use the same words, same gestures, and feel like we are on the same wavelength.
and my first instinct was, "There is an accident over there." And suddenly, boom!
For a second, my heart stopped.
I opened my eyes, I was actually laid on the street, I started to feel pain and I was shaking inside,
and I eventually realized that a car had just struck me.
People were crowding around me.
Normally, the first reflex is to try to get up.
I remember at that moment I screamed my mother's name.
I could barely move my left leg.
I tried to use my hand to get up. That hand, but nothing worked.
I could actually feel my fingers touching the ground, but I was unable to pick myself up.
And I was told, "Don't move.
Your arm is out of its socket."
So, people are crowding around me, they took me to the hospital, and then, the journey of reflection began.
Why did I not listen?
And they asked me, "Who should we call?"
I said, "I wrote the name of my girlfriend on the form." She was my girlfriend at that time.
But then, in addition to the physical pain, I felt intellectual and moral pain.
This is the person I wanted to break up with who would come.
So, they took me to the hospital, and then there the journey began:
pain, bitterness, and then the questioning.
A long period of rehabilitation will start.
It lasted more than two years.
Make simple gestures, learn to walk again, to lift that arm. Something that is so simple took six months.
But the most important thing, it's the inner work.
Why did I not listen?
And this work... Because my girlfriend, my relationship, and my feelings have not changed, but she is there for me.
Lastly, we need to be well-intentioned
towards each other. As soon as a positive emotion is shared, it immediatly transforms into a micro-moment of love.
So, in a nutshell, and I might shock you with this, but right now, as I'm speaking to you, I don't love my partner
Hence the question: what should I do?
So, time passed
and a year later, I was able to walk and drive again.
And I was invited to go out. We call it networking. This takes place also in Santa Monica.
So, remember, I live in the Valley. It's a very dry area.
It takes just about 25 minutes. to go to Santa Monica.
You must take major freeways that lead to the West Coast.
And so in the morning, as I was leaving to attend the networking event, I remembered that one of my friends had posted on Facebook, "Tonight, my mentor, Les Brown, will talk about the importance of the sixth sense.
So, I said to myself, "That is important, you don't want to miss this."
So, I'm on the freeway, and I left to Santa Monica.
And that day, I was able to listen to the talk via my phone.
I also saw in the distance the 405 Freeway that leads to the airport.
And on the right, I know that I have to take the other freeway which goes actually to Santa Monica.
I said, "This is important, you don't want to miss the exit."
I gradually approached the intersection.
And at the same time, as I got closer to the intersection, the same little voice
- remember, last time I didn't listen to it -
so I said, "It is important."
The voice told me, "Jean Marc, stay there.
It is OK if you miss the exit, but stay there."
That lasted for two, three seconds. As I was watching on the right the intersection, I saw two cars trying to pass each other.
I carefully looked ahead, and the voice was still speaking to me.
And at the same time, as I am listening, bam!
While I am looking at the car accident, I stayed on the 405.
I am looking at the two cars which just hit each other.
because we're neither in synchrony, nor sharing any positive emotion, and we aren't reciprocating good intention for each other.
In fact, from a scientific point of view, my body doesn't feel any love for him.
But rest assured, we have experienced for years, countless micro-moments of love, so much that they've strengthened our relationship by creating a bond of trust and safety conducive to more moments of love in the future.
And then I told myself, "It is time to listen.
The Voice cares for you.
It saved your life today."
And at the same time, I am looking at the airbag that is deflating on the driver's head.
Let's call him like that.
And I decided to continue. And from that moment, I told myself, "You must stop. You need to work on this, because the voice cares for you. It is there to lead you to the right path."
So, the work began, and I told myself, "What do you need to do to cultivate this inner voice?
And it is the same voice actually that lead me here today.
At that time, I was hiking near my house and the voice-- And I got an email invitation.
And I decided to reply. I told myself, "This voice can save lives, and help a lot of people, young and adults, find meaning in their lives.
It is not just to prevent accidents. It's about finding meaning in life."
So, you would probably tell me, what should I do?
What do I need to do to cultivate my inner voice?
I actually use three methods which in my opinion can help anyone.
So, the first step consists of prayers.
You could replace it by meditation.
At that time, my first morning ritual was, "I would take the phone and check my messages," I would look at my Facebook messages," and basically, this was leading the rest of my day.
In fact, I used to let the outside world control me or give me confidence if you can call it like that.
Today, my morning ritual starts with prayers.
And it helps me gain serenity within or for the rest of the day.
And the second method, which generally follows the prayer:
I get up usually before sunrise, I leave the house and take my car for 15 minutes, and I go to a park.
The objective is to walk and reflect,
reflect on the progress of the week.
I usually start walking around 5:40 am in a large green park, next to a golf course.
It allows me to reflect and meditate,
Now you might be pondering about the good of those breakthroughs
and what they could change in our daily live?
while enjoying the color of the sky, the birds, the animals. It is often said that walking is very good.
Doctors usually recommend walking for 30 minutes per day because when we walk, the only thing we can do is think.
This is the only thing one can do:
reflect about our problems, etc. And this phase of reflection, I have done it for more than two years.
I have been walking for more than two years to find meaning in my life and move forward.
And the third method is very helpful because I live in a city where there's lot of pollution and competition. So, I said to myself, "You are doing all of this early work, but it's not all.
It is important to create an environment that fosters peace.
So, when I return to Los Angeles in January, I'm going to move to an area closer to nature."
I want to be surrounded by nature even if I have to commute to the city to go to work. I want to go where there is peace and serenity.
And on top of that, I also reflect about my relationships, whether personal or professional ones.
As you know, we can have relationships who are everything but toxic, who come with their problems and eventually make us change direction from our life projects.
So, every year, I reevaluate my relationships: should I keep this relationship? Maybe. Or should I spend less time with it or remove it?
So, you may be wondering, how can those methods benefit our society or Martinique, or other societies?
Well, actually, I believe this is an essential tool for future generations, for all the people who today no longer know where to go and lost the meaning of their lives.
And it's not just for young people, this is not just to prevent problems.
The idea, is that life, life expects things of us. And we'll always search ourselves
as long as we don't know what it is.
And some people end up into troubles.
So for me, it is important because life is at stake. When I decided to come to Martinique for this conference, and spend time with families and friends, I told myself, "It's important. It is important to share that message."
The voice actually gave it to me a few months ago while I was walking in Los Angeles.
Because the impacts are huge on our society that is lost and confused,
So, as I am sharing this information, and you're all there, actors in this life, the people you know or even you, it can help you.
And for me, it is essential.
I told myself, "You must pass on this message."
I do not want to be judged, because I received that message so it is necessary to pass it.
In reality, they can change everything
because we all have a nerve that connects our brain to our heart.
It is called "the vagus nerve".
His huge blue eyes watched me back, and we fell in love at first sight.
Still today, when I wake up in the morning, I watch my man lying next to me and I am still amazed.
My heart rate rises and I am still head over heals, almost 24 hours a day.
And I showed up today to share it voluntarily.
So my big idea for my small island, for young people or adults, all generations, Martinique or elsewhere, all societies, it is that it's time to create what I call The Inner Voice School.
A school where we teach people to make room for silence
where they can pray or meditate, and also learn that when they start their days,
it's essential to reflect on the meaning of their lives, and ask themselves if their environment fosters the silence that we so deeply need to discern what the voice wants to tell us.
And this is the message I wanted to share with you.
Because imagine, imagine if tomorrow, in Martinique, on Monday, if all the people on the freeway had awaken inspired, passionate, to go to work, or whatever their occupations,
because they had found meaning in their lives because people were at the right place, and not just there to make money at the end.
In fact, that's the Martinique I am dreaming about.
And I hope that you too, you agree with this message, because I believe that, when we find and hear that voice, we eventually find the right path.
But we must dare to go looking for it.
And this is the message I wanted to share with you.
Thank you.
Every child is an artist.
The catch is to remain an artist
growing up. This quote comes from another Paul, a painter whom I admire very much. Pablo Picasso.
It's a wonderful quote, but I still wonder: what exactly did he mean by this?
To remain a child growing up or to remain an artist?
For me, it's obvious, it's to remain a child.
My name is Paul Marques-Duarte and I'm 18,
I'm sorry to say.
The idea of becoming an adult absolutely terrified me.
I was even afraid to celebrate my own birthday.
I have even hoped to not celebrate it this year.
It was my friends and family who woke me up one Saturday morning in December.
I suppose anyone would ask themselves what kind of teenager has no desire to grow older?
It has very positive effects since it enables us to connect to others, it lowers our heart rate and regulates our emotions.
But what is its relationship with love?
Sorry to disappoint you, but I am no Peter Pan.
Pity, otherwise this would have been an awesome talk.
Just picture it, second star to the right and straight on till morning!
I'm already rambling; that tends to happen quite often.
Here's what we'll do:
those sitting in the first row -- I see some familiar faces, actually - give me a sign when that happens, like: "Hey, stop rambling!"
Something like that.
Now, as I was saying,
the word <i>child</i> comes from Latin, meaning "one who does not speak", "one who does not know".
Sometimes, I get the feeling that children are the only ones who truly understand it all.
I can see some of you are a little skeptical.
So, let me give you
a very concrete example: the subway.
There's one in Rennes, actually.
Here I am on the subway.
A typical adult riding the subway on a Monday morning.
Now, your typical child on the subway.
Dad, dad!
I'm driving!
Shhhhhhh!
Voice: You're rambling again.
Who said that?
When I told you to stop me, I didn't mean it.
Hey it wasn't them,
I said it.
Well, this nerve mirrors our responsiveness to sources of love.
The higher our vagal tone, the more micro-moments of love we are able to experience.
At first, researchers thought the characteristics of the vagus nerve were determined at birth and didn't evolve with time.
Oh no! Not him!
Ladies and gentlemen, I present to you the artist within me.
This annoying guy who's always talking about projects and committed films.
Surely you and your childishness, you'll go far.
In any case, it's thanks to me that you could go and have fun in Cannes last week.
Don't tell me you didn't enjoy it.
Well, anyway, it's my turn now, so please, leave me alone.
Sorry, listening to you, I was kind of annoyed by what you just sid.
How can you get a decent life, study, have a career?
Lalala lalala.
Oh, great. That attitude
will get you nowhere. Ok, I got it but when someone hears you older folks say: "Oh, you kids have it good."
I'd like this wonderful time to last forever.
You see, kid, you can't have everything you want in life.
Listen to yourself!
You're just like all the others.
You've lost your spirit.
Please leave me alone, go back to your films.
It's just... What?
Well, I can't...
You can't what?
You know exactly what!
Oh no, no I don't.
I can't without you.
Can't what?
Come on now, make films!
And then researches showed that we could kind of "muscle it up".
So in short, micro-moments of love activate and strengthen the vagus nerve and the more toned our nerve is, the greater is our capacity to experience those micro-moments of love.
And why can't you?
Because you're the one with the imagination.
Ha! So you admit defeat!
Alright, let me finish this talk and maybe, just maybe, I'll give you some ideas.
But I need them right now!
Such a hurry!
Relax, take your time.
What's with you, grown-ups? Why always so rushed?
I'm not sure.
Do what these people are doing.
Spend an afternoon listening to awesome ideas.
Take your time!
They're enjoying it.
Listen to this kid! Lecturing us!
Fine, since you're always so hard-headed why don't you come finish
this talk for me?
Come on!
Come on, man up!
Hey, where are you going?
Oh sure, it's easy to do that.
Have you seen him? No?
Anyway, I think I've made up with
myself, more or less.
I think when Picasso said: "Every child is an artist, The problem is to remain one as we grow up." he meant remaining both an artist and a child.
And so, I think the best advice I can give you all is
to hold on to your inner child.
In fact, it's a virtuous circle where love begets love.
And it's awesome because not only it increases our level of happiness, but researchers have shown that it increases our life expectancy too.
So the more toned our nerve is, the longer we live.
It's this... Oh, sorry sorry.
An example of what I mean by that: let yourself be captivated by the dance of a bird,
smile on the subway.
I promise you you'll get smiled back.
You'll see just how contagious it can be.
Really enjoy every moment of your life to its fullest.
And take your time.
I think it's safe to say that art is child's play.
I'm not saying it's easy.
I would never even begin to say that creating a work of art is easy; I should know.
In just a few minutes, other artists will take to the stage.
I'm sure that they can relate to these very words.
And so, I'd like to say that it's imperative that we hold onto our inner child in order to have a sense of artistry and a different perspective on the world.
This is why, ladies and gentlemen, I invite each of you to go and find the child in you.
To take their hand, and to keep them close for the rest of your lives.
 Thank you.
As a small child, sitting on the lap of my mother who taught piano in private tuition in the house of my childhood, I was rocked by the music, and I watched all her fingers browsing the piano keys.
As it was often the same pieces that was returning, Schumann, Mozart, Chopin, I knew the songs by heart and I corrected the students by whistling.
In my family, education necessarily involves learning an instrument, and I chose the harp at age nine, after hearing Marielle Nordmann play a concerto for harp with the Strasbourg Philharmonic Orchestra.
The heat, the roundness of tone, the beauty of the instrument, and its size which allows almost to be hidden, made me fall in love at first sight.
It was this instrument and not another.
After extensive musical studies, I was awarded with my soprano friend, Nathalie Gaudefroy, a first prize in the International Chamber Music Competition in Arles.
This was followed by two wonderful years, rich in music, encounters, trips, laughter, success, because we were invited in beautiful festivals and were receiving a lot of proposals for interesting projects.
I was leading the so intense and creative life I have dreamed of when I was a child.
On July 6, 2001, there was a storm at a concert where I was a spectator.
Now you probably want to know how we are supposed to nurture our vagus nerve.
Well, exercises are plenty.
I'm going to introduce you to two of them plus a little bonus.
A plane tree has fallen upon the audience.
I was knocked to the ground and immobilized by the branches.
There were many dead, and I am one of the most physically affected victims.
Despite the shock of the fall, I was conscious, and while trying to free myself of the branches, I realized that I was not able to move my legs.
I immediately thought of the harp, because the legs are essential to be able to play.
It is often not known, but the harp is played with seven pedals.
I saw my life flash before my eyes, and I was terrified at the thought of not being able to play.
For to me, in order to live was necessarily to play the harp.
Following that, I experienced the two most painful years of my life, between the hospital and the rehabilitation center.
I felt like I was in a nightmare, I had to get out of it as quickly as possible, to heal, to control the wheelchair, and to manage all the negative words.
I was advised at the time to give up the harp, because of my inability to use the pedals, and to start practicing a parasport and/or a new instrument as an amateur.
I was told that it would be better that I make a career as a librarian, or something sedentary, because of my poor health.
I was told that any coquetry or femininity was useless in a wheelchair.
So, knowing that for example, today where the dress code was supposed to be jeans and shirt, I found a way to come in a long dress and lace, you can imagine that these words were almost a pain for me.
And the worst is that they told me I should give up the wish to have a fulfilling love life, because men do not stay with a woman in a wheelchair.
I chose not to listen to these words.
I did exactly the opposite of everything they had advised me, and as soon as I left the center, I struggle to play again.
In this quest, I had the chance to meet two men: Jean-Marie Panterne, the Director of the Instrumentarium, and Marc Lamoureux, an exceptional engineer for whom like me, the word "impossible" was not admissible.
Together, we have designed an automatic harp that would allow me to play again.
This project took two years to see the light of the day.
We faced some difficulties, but it was exciting, because we wanted to have together a really satisfactory outcome.
It is, beyond our expectations, as the electro-pneumatic harp allows you to play through a simplified use of the pedals, a much larger repertoire than the normal harp.
Some composers even wrote for this new harp, which is ultimately a step forward in the history of the instrument.
Its name is "l'anjamatique" from my first name Anja and automatic, and I now teach it at the Strasbourg Conservatory to non-disabled people.
I lost everything in a second, and it took years to rebuild a life that matches my expectations.
This is the case right now. I am in love and loved, I play and I teach my instrument, and I work with talented partners.
The first one I'd like you to try is the kindness meditation.
The positive effects of meditation are numerous.
In the month of July, I experienced an incredible moment.
Milan Kundera called me in person, to tell me he was giving me the permission to record excerpts from The Unbearable Lightness of Being, illustrated by musical pieces by Schumann, Chopin, and Dvorak. He told me that he had been moved by my playing, and I have perceived those words as a kind of validation, a blessing for all these struggles.
I sincerely believe that all the difficult moments, as painful as they are, move us ahead as we aspire to a goal and we make every effort to get there.
Nobody knows better than you for what you're made for.
Disability still scares and I never wanted to recognize myself in the restricted vision that some people have about it.
Because it is neither a handicap nor a difference or a disease that creates our identity. It is the energy and the love we put to accomplish what is dearest to us.
My life is to play and to move forward with lightness.
 
One in five women will get cancer, which means 160 women in this room.
As for the others, you will also be affected, if only indirectly.
This is a tragedy, but what if it were also part of the solution?
When I became ill, my sisters, by blood and by heart, saw to it that I would never go alone to chemotherapy.
They ran errands, cooked, wrote, called, in short, exerting incredible energy to see me through.
This energy, this need to be useful, to stick together, is very powerful when you've been hit yourself.
One in five women, plus their sisters by blood or by heart, add up to a lot of women who have to deal with cancer and the energy it requires.
Along with them, we have researchers who do an extraordinary job.
Today, one out of two cancers is cured, while only one in three was being cured in the '90s.
What is less known is what Dr. Fabien Reyal, researcher at the M. Curie Institute and my partner, explained to me. Namely that researchers need us to participate in their studies, whether we have been ill or not.
In order to find us, they waste precious time.
To get us in the doctor's office, in the waiting rooms, or look us up in the white pages.
For them, recruiting volunteers is time consuming, laborious and expensive.
That's why we created "Seintinelles". 
Specifically, it's a website where women sign up by giving us their email address, so that we can inform them each time a researcher needs volunteers to participate in their study.
We've been online for one year, and we already have 6,800 women who've been asked to participate in four studies, and this is only the beginning.
We are aiming for 50,000 Seintinelles, as we want to open up to men and other countries because solidarity and goodwill have no borders.
It increases happiness, intelligence, and life expectancy.
So to do the kindness meditation, you need to get yourself comfortable in a quiet place, and focus your attention on a person you feel close to.
The idea is to have for her kind thoughts and intentions.
"Saint-inels" is a play on words, of course, but it's much more than that.
Cancer is a deadly war.
Alone, we can only win a battle, but not the war.
To win a war, we need an army.
In this room, there are 1,600 who could join our army.
You are sixteen hundred more reasons to hope.
Thank you.
"I am not one of those who believe that we can suppress the suffering in this world, that suffering is a divine law; but I am one of those who thinks and asserts that poverty can be annihilated.
Poverty is a disease of society, just as leprosy was a disease of the human body; we can see poverty disappear just as leprosy disappeared.
Poverty: do you want to know the extent to which it can reach, the extent to which it has reached?
There are in Paris, streets, houses, cesspits, where families, entire families, live chaotically together, men, women, children, having nothing for beds, nothing for bedding, I almost said for clothing, than grubby heaps of fermenting rags, where creatures bury themselves alive to escape the winter cold.
This is a fact.
Do you want some more?
Recently, an unfortunate literary man died of starvation, died of starvation, and it was established after his death that he had not eaten for six days.
Well, I say that these are things that should not be; I say that society must do all it can, show all its solicitude, all its understanding, all its resolve, so that such things do not come about"
I say that such events, in a civilized country, engage the conscience of the whole of society; that I feel, I who speaks, complicit and part of it, and that these are not just wrongs against humanity, but that these are crimes against God!
This is why I would like this assembly to be of but one soul to take steps toward this great goal: the abolition of poverty!"
These few words were uttered on July 9th, 1849, at the French National Legislative Assembly, by a young representative called Victor Hugo.
Well, you might agree with me that this is an address that is both moving and convincing.
Well, this is precisely what interests me.
There is a connection between emotion and conviction.
It is because the words of Victor Hugo have the power to move us that they achieve the power to convince us.
This connection has been known for a long time.
Already 2,500 years ago, Aristotle considered that pathos was an essential element of what he called rhetoric.
Today, this connection between emotion and conviction is validated by cognitive and behavioral sciences.
But there is a problem, that of manipulation.
You can practice it with your children.
For example, you could ask them daily to take five minutes to think about a person they like.
Because if we can be lead to accept that by which we have been touched, it means that our emotions can manipulate us.
This is what comes about when a speaker moves us skillfully with a mendacious discourse, a discourse that does not correspond to actual world reality.
I'll give you an example.
In August 2002, the Vice President of the United States of America, Mister Dick Cheney, frightens the entire world by stating that: "There is no doubt that Saddam Hussein now has weapons of mass destruction."
The fear we felt then was real.
It had been caused by a speech, but that speech was based on erroneous facts.
A few years later, the US administration admitted to lying: Iraq did not possess any weapon of mass destruction, and Dick Cheney had been fully aware of it.
However, is every use of emotions in discourse going to be manipulatory?
Well, no.
Because we are not computers.
The social world is not an Excel spreadsheet.
To make decisions, we need our mental powers, of course, but we also need our feelings, our emotions.
And this explains why Victor Hugo chose a speech overflowing with pathos to talk about poverty in front of his fellow representatives, representatives who, for the most part, had only ever known opulence.
For them, poverty was a theoretical concept.
If Victor Hugo wanted to stand a chance of influencing their vote, he first had to change their way of looking at the world, and in order to do that, he needed to address their emotions.
If I am telling you all this, it's because for more than 10 years I've been studying the art of argumentation, and I have been teaching it to all citizens, from political science students to highschoolers, from private sector employees to activists, how not to let themselves get manipulated, but also to defend their thinking, their point of view, efficiently, for sure, but also ethically.
So, what does an expert in rhetoric say about emotion in discourse?
Well, you see, classically, there are three methods that provide for the creation of emotion in discourse, and we can find them all in Victor Hugo's speech.
Remember, Victor Hugo started by associating poverty with leprosy, with a disease of society.
It was not without design.
In rhetoric, it is called a work of metaphorization: the use of an image, of a comparison, to convey a message.
In this case, this comparison allows Victor Hugo to create a very specific emotion: disgust, disgust of poverty, just as we had a disgust of leprosy. This disgust provokes within us a desire to take action, a desire to eradicate poverty, just as we had the desire to eradicate leprosy.
I was telling you that it was a very classic tool. Let's teleport ourselves to 2002 for another example.
In 2002, the Earth Summit took place in Johannesburg, the Earth Summit that was one of the first big conferences on global warming.
From the platform in Johannesburg, Jacques Chirac, president of France, will put forward an image that will stick in people's minds: "Our house is burning, and we are looking the other way."
The second exercise I propose you is about social interactions.
You probably figured out that love is only felt in the presence of others.
So I invite you to think, every evening, about three meetings you had during the day, and ask yourself whether or not you felt close to these people.
It was a comparison. It was made to stir up emotions, in this case, surprise at first, and then anger, the desire to take action.
But back to Victor Hugo.
Later in his speech, you will remember, Victor Hugo spoke at length describing all the things that families could do to escape the cold of winter as best they could.
This part of his speech is also not without design. This description constitutes one of the means of stirring up emotion in an audience.
In this case, Victor Hugo's working of emotion is very interesting: he seeks to induce sadness, sadness that within us leads to shame, a shame that leads to anger, and it is this anger that prompts us into action.
I am going to give you another example, a more disturbing one, this one.
In 1974, in the French parliament, Simone Veil was making the case for legalizing abortion.
Several representatives were actively opposing her.
Among these representatives is Monsieur Pierre Bas. Pierre Bas, speaking from the speaker's platform, did not hesitate to describe the bins in which the little bodies of aborted children would pile up.
"The bins in which the little bodies of these aborted children will pile up." Here we have a description being used to create an image that shocks, to stir up an emotion of disgust, and incite against voting in the law.
To return again to Victor Hugo, to the third stage of his speech, that narrative, that account, of a literary man dead of starvation because he could not buy food.
Once again, it is not without design.
Narration is the third classical method to bring out emotions.
In contemporary communication, we would call it storytelling.
In Victor Hugo's speech, we again find the same working up of emotions as earlier: sadness, shame, anger, the leading to action.
One last example to show you what a classic technique it is. It was used quite notably by Robert Badinter in his fight against the death penalty.
In 1977, Robert Badinter - he was a lawyer then - was defending the murderer Patrick Henry.
His sole endeavor in court is to try to save him from capital punishment.
In his closing speech, he turns directly toward the members of the jury and explains to them what will happen if they condemn his client to death. He tells them: "Time will pass, let me tell you, we will abolish the death penalty, and you will be on your own with your verdict for ever, and your children will know that you once condemned a young man to death."
Here, yet again, this narration is to stir up emotion, in this case, fear and shame.
Metaphorization, description, narration, these are the three classical tools of discourse that allow us to stir up emotion in an audience.
This shows us that emotions are not a totally mysterious entity, they can be worked, fashioned, and used in the noblest of ways, or in the most dubious of ways.
Apart from that, what we have just seen regarding emotion is a variation of a broader observation: rhetoric is a technique, it can be learned, it can be taught, and I advocate that it be disseminated as widely and as soon as possible, probably as soon as middle school, because we all need it.
Whether it is in our professional lives or in our personal lives, we need strength of conviction and not let ourselves be manipulated, because yes, indeed, rhetoric is a form of power.
The only way to make sure this power will be used equitably is to ensure it is imparted to us all.
Thank you.
The idea is to become aware of the quality of the relationships you build throughout the day.
Again, you can practice this with your children by asking them to ponder daily about three great moments they may have had with their friends or with an adult.
Nothing has changed.
Nothing has changed: I love him as much I did the first day.
Finally, to conclude on a sweet note, let me mention hugs because they have magical powers.
When we hug someone, after 20 seconds, our brain starts to secret oxytocin, the hormone of attachment and well-being.
It also secretes dopamine, the hormone of motivation and good mood.
As a matter of fact, hugging makes us more patient, lowers our stress and anxiety, increases our self-confidence, and strenghtens social connections.
And above all, it's free and within arms' reach.
Children love that.
So no, I didn't fall in love at first sight with my husband.
I'm not head over heals for him 24 hours a day.
And he was probably right when he told me, "Today, you don't love me."
He was right because, like you, we love each other a few minutes a day. We've loved each other a hundred times before and hopefully, we'll still love each other a few thousand times more.
By the way, if we think about it, this small rounded belly that is hardly noticeable is precisely the outcome of these past micro-moments of love and, I'm sure, the cause of future moments of love.
So tone your vagus nerve and you'll be happier and live longer.
And most importantly, don't forget to transmit all of this to your children because they are the guardians of tomorrow.
Nurturing love is, in my opinion, the biggest step you could take with your family on the path to happiness.
And I wish you all a good journey.
I should start by telling you something: I have been a fan of fashion since the age of seven.
I design, I sew, I patch clothes up.
So, my idea of heaven is the aptly named "Marché Saint-Pierre" in Montmartre. A place filled with all the fabrics you can dream of: poplins, muslins, twills, cretonnes; a place also filled with a very distinctive atmosphere of friendliness and shared interest among the clients, as if we recognize each other and respect each other, us weekend fashion designers and fashion professionals; a place which brings people together from very different backgrounds, who don't necessarily mix anywhere else, but who, here, are alike, because they are only defined by this same thing, the love of scissors sliding across fabric, the pattern you trace, the needle going in and out, and the material that falls
just right on the mannequin. That's why, for me, clothes serve, above all, to weave together - if you'll excuse the pun - the threads that form bonds between people.
For instance, have you ever expressed empathy towards someone by complimenting them on their outfit?
What we decide to wear has that certain ability to distinguish us from one another, while reinforcing and marking our belonging to a group, or to several groups, social, religious, regional, professional, generational.
In France, we are proud to be home to such strong cultural diversity in a relatively reduced space.
In France, a country recognized throughout the world for its elegance and its way of life, we attach a lot of importance to what we wear on our backs, and on our heads.
Let's talk about headwear.
You don't notice anything?
These photos were taken during different periods and represent women from various backgrounds and regions.
Well, as you may suspect, such a story only exists in fairy tales.
Actually, I didn't fall
in love at first sight. I didn't because neither love at first sight, nor unhindered love and head over heals 24/7, has ever existed,
However, they have two things in common.
Firstly, all these photos were taken in France.
Secondly, they show that, at all times in history, French women covered their heads at some point in the day, in the year, even in their lives.
The function and form of headwear evolves according to customs and fashions, but it continues to be an integral part of our clothing.
And here you go!
Headband, fascinator, sunhat, woolly hat, cap, balaclava, hood, hat, headscarf, veil, toque, turban, visor ... Put up your hand those of you that haven't worn anything on your head this year - those who have never done so in their lives.
 It's unlikely!
These family photos are mine.
They're those of my friends' or of friends' of friends, but they could also be yours, right?
So when I hear that covering your head isn't French, it makes me laugh.
Not French?
But that's to ignore our history!
That's not looking beyond the end of your nose!
Covering your head, for women, has always been a subject of debate.
As for the ancient Greeks, the veil distinguished married women of high virtue from prostitutes that could and must go out with nothing on their heads.
In "Corinthians", Saint Paul urges believers to cover their women.
In the Muslim tradition, only prophet Muhammad's wives, initially, wore a veil, thus marking their belonging to an elite that was both social and religious.
For centuries, even millenniums, a covered head has by turns meant: modesty and archaism, conservatism and decorum.
Even in my own family, each generation of women has given a different meaning to headwear.
Take for example, that for my paternal great-grandmother, at the start of the 20th century, wearing a hat meant conforming to a group she was part of, and asserting her belonging to an area, the Redon area in Brittany.
For her daughter, my paternal grandmother, in the 1940s, to go out with your hair on show had a certain nuance at the time. It meant escaping the peasant headscarf, which marked both your rural origins and the fact you worked in a field, where it was used to protect against sun and dirt.
Going out with no headwear was to proclaim oneself a lady of the town, even one of those blow-dried cinema stars who always looked perfect.
In the countryside, still in Brittany, we used to go out bareheaded, keeping headscarves that were tied under the chin for Sunday mass, hats for attending weddings, and veils for marriage ceremonies and for communions.
As for my maternal great-grandmother, more urban and middle-class, headscarves and hats, like gloves and pearls, were mandatory attire for all women in high society, an accessory that both marked her status and stopped her styled hair from getting tousled when she found herself going from a promenade by the sea to a game of bridge.
As for my mum, who grew up with the May '68 events, the majority of headwear, middle-class or working-class, aesthetic or religious, represented an infringement of women's bodily freedom.
no more than soulmates or eternal love -
at least not the way we understand it.
She didn't think she really had a head for hats, but nonetheless sported a boater in summer, and a hood or a headscarf in winter.
Finally, for me, wearing something on your head is to multiply the fashion potential of an outfit, to tell a story, to invent a persona.
My weaknesses are: wedding hats, which I create myself; tweed caps, which fill my cupboards; fur toques, to the great disgust of some; and silk headscarves, which, tied in a headband around my neck, allow me to dream of myself as a reincarnation of Grace Kelly or Audrey Hepburn, although most often I end up looking like one of my great aunts when they were twice my age.
So, this relationship that we maintain with what we wear on our heads is indicative of each period.
It also reflects the concerns and evolutions of our society, here in France, but also abroad, in other countries.
So, the next time you pass by a haberdashery, think about this bond woven by fabric.
And when you pass a woman wearing something on her head, remember that that headwear, as full of memories, symbols, and history, as it is, remains a piece of fabric or straw that only has the meaning that we want to give it, and that a head, covered or uncovered, so long as the decision is free, need not obscure much more troubling concerns.
To finish, let's go back to these walls and these shadows.
What we wear on our backs, and on our heads, protects us from fair and bad weather,
from the gaze of others or of the divine. It can also make the wearer stronger, and drive them to assert themselves, show themselves at their best.
It's the shy people's flag.
Outfits and headwear have nothing, of wall or of shadow, than there ability to protect.
If they establish, in effect, physical barrier between individuals, they scream: "Look at me!
Interact with me!
Identify with me!"
So, let's look beyond these barriers, and not make a wall of this material but a door.
Thank you very much.
 Sometimes, ideas come at most unlikely times.
I had that idea on the plane. A Paris-Tokyo flight, a 12-hour flight; it's very long.
And above my head was that annoying noise.
Is it annoying?
I can go on, otherwise.
 The air conditioning was broken, so...
it was rather depressing.
But after four of five hours, the same noise started to become musical, even... quite groovy.
 So I noted on the notebook I always carry,
We all have certainties about love.
For example, we believe it is this unique bond tying us to the other, it is commitment, desire or trust.
In fact, none of those qualifies as love.
I often have this, 1,000 ideas per second.
Sometimes good, often quite bad. Never mind!
I write them all down.
As my teacher used to say, "The opposite of forgetting... is noting."
Great!
But also because an idea never comes alone,
a musical idea never comes alone.
It's like an ecosystem of ideas.
A magnet that attracts other ideas.
Because one idea can hide another, let's see what's hidden behind mine.
In fact, It hid a melody.
Not bad.
But I have a feeling that there's more to it.
I'll have to explore further.
Every day, I take ideas I've noted in my notebook.
I explore them. I play with them,
crush them, spin them around.
I water them with love,
as if they were plants. As Jung said, "The creative mind plays with objects it loves."
Let's make love to that idea.
 Love is beautiful.
But, as you can imagine, unfortunately, - here comes the sad part of the talk - love is not enough.
It's tragic.
But it's true.
You also need knowledge, mastery of the instrument, knowledge of harmony, solfège, melody, lots of musical techniques.
And also, you need to work hard.
They are rather the cause and the result of love.
After years of studies and research, Barbara Fredrickson and her team have redefined love.
All right, yes.
Work is fine, but I prefer to play.
After all, who enjoys work?
Honestly, if I wanted to work I wouldn't be a musician. 
It's not just about playing.
To master any game, you need to know the rules.
And the better you do, the better you play.
Now, how long you need to come up with such an idea?
It can take minutes, a week, months, even years.
Sometimes, it's good to just let it simmer.
Do something else, go out, read, go to the cinema, the restaurant, meet people,
meditate, run on the beach, do yoga, make love, eat a felafel.
 I think you just had a snapshot of my life, actually.
 That's where ideas come from.
Like trees or plants: too much water at once is no good.
You have to water trees, so ideas, regularly and as we are really the soil for ideas, our spirit is their soil, we need to enrich ourselves, for the idea, the tree, the plant to grow.
It takes time.
And we need to accept this time to mature.
And while we wait for it, I'll play some Bach.
 I like this left hand indeed, it's not bad.
 Right. I think I'll steal this idea from Johann-Sebastian.
 But I'll change it a bit, I'll play it my way.
 This could be a missing piece in my jigsaw.
These motives from Bach could link my opening, my little theme with its development.
Let's see.
And here is what they concluded: love is neither long-lasting, nor exclusive, nor unconditional.
Love is not exclusive.
When I was a child, I thought my mother loved me and my brother every other day: one day him, one day me,
 It works.
But we still need a conclusion.
Hummmm... Do you see the Notre-Dame Cathedral?
It's not far. Every time I look at it
I see a detail I hadn't seen before.
Even though it's always been there.
Only my eyes have changed.
So, this maturation isn't only for the sake of just doing something else while we wait for ideas
it's also to see the idea under a new light.
That's how, after two, three months of thinking about the air conditioned, I realized it could be my conclusion.
How? Doubling with both hands
with a little variation.
It works. Is my piece ready?
I have an introduction, the melody, the development, both linked by Bach's motives, and now a conclusion.
How do you know an idea's ready?
It's hard to tell. I often wonder.
To me, an idea is ready from the moment its internal structure is solid enough to face reality, when it tells a story.
So, I'll now play for you the air conditioned meets Bach.
Unlikely marriage.
I could call it a Bach's Air.
 So here is for your ears only,TedxParis: Air conditioned meets Bach;
from an idea to composition.
 
We are all programmed to love and be loved.
It's in us.
It is our genetic programming necessary for the reproduction of the species.
taking turns, no one gets jealous,
as if you could only love one person at a time.
Obviously, I was wrong.
1023
1023
